# Genetic Programming JS -- based on AST #

## Automatic JavaScript code generator ##

This is an experiment in code generation/optimization using only a [genetic algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genetic_algorithm).

This genetic code generator builds the JavaScript code to populate a function which matches the requirements defined by a user-supplied unit test set.

This genetic algorithm uses a fitness scoring method which penalizes interpreter errors (eg. invalid syntax) and runtime errors while rewarding code which runs well, passes the most unit tests, and is the most compact.

This repo is more language-aware of JavaScript as it modifies an <abbr title="Abstract Syntax Tree">AST</abbr> rather than concatenating strings, as [the previous repo](https://github.com/carbonphyber/genetic-programming-js) did.

### Why Do This? ###

Skilled programmers are expensive and machine processor time has become extremely cheap. This started as an experiment to find out how much a non-programmer could be empowered to "write code" without having to know anything about the programming language. One thought I had was to design a SOA contract (an API of lots of different function signatures) and then outsource the creation of unit tests to [MTurk](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amazon_Mechanical_Turk).

Also, genetic algorithms are simply interesting.

### Why JavaScript? ###

It's a common language. It can be run in a `ndejs` server environment or in a web browser context. Also, it has `eval`, which enables the language to dynamically build code which it can then run, which is extremely beneficial for building code which is likely to fail compilation/interpretation. (*note*: avoid using `eval` like the bubonic plague unless you are experienced enough to avoid the security and performance drawbacks to using eval in most environments).

Also, I found [genetic-js](https://www.npmjs.com/package/genetic-js), a great library for implementing genetic algorithms.

### How do I use this? ###

To run the genetic program generator, run `node index.js` from command line. This script should run fune under `Node 6.x` and newer on a Linux/BSD/Darwin OS. It should be easy/quick to port it to run on Node Windows (pull requests welcome).

To create your own unit test set (which will generate different code), clone `tests/1.js`, alter the tests, and edit the parameter at the bottom of `index.js`, which describes which test should be used.

The default behavior for text feedback is to update stats and the best code after each significant improvement in fitness score.

### FAQs ###

Q: Why doesn't the generated function pass all of the tests?

A: It's difficult to tune a genetic algorithm to *always* find it's way to the perfectly optimal result. A common problem is that a genetic algorithm finds a "local maxima" and can't find a way to improve. This is a side-effect of the fitness scoring function.

Q: How can I improve the quality of the generated code?

A: The number and quality of tests in your test set is paramount. Additionally, you could consider tweaking how the code generator in the mutation function works. Useful improvements would likely involve giving the mutation function more JavaScript "intuition" (rules about the structure of the language) or newer language features. Additionally, you could migrate the code data structure from an array of strings to an [AST](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstract_syntax_tree).

Q: What is the garbage code in the first iteration?

A: This genetic algorithm starts with a randomly generated list of operators and operands. The mutation and crossover functions are less drastic so they are likely to progressively yield more stable code.

Q: Why doesn't the generator stop?

A: It's designed to stop after either (1) an optimal solution is found or (2) a fixed amount of time with no fitness score progress. Use `ctrl+c` to cancel the process if you don't want to wait.

Q: Can it generate more than just a function?

A: It's only tuned to write a trivial function so far. Non-trivial code comes later. Please fork and play with the tuning and the mutator function yourself. I'd love to see how other developers are able to improve it.

Q: Why does it generate code with operators like `x << 1` instead of `x * 2` and `x | y` instead of `x + y`?

A: They are valid operators and they likely create *very* similar outputs given the same operands. The final code isn't necessarily *wrong* for your tests (although sometimes is), but some operators are just not used as frequently by humans. Experiment with new idioms you see generated by the code.

Q: Are you *trying* to make SkyNet happen?

A: We all know it's going to happen eventually -- all of the dystopic science fiction tells us so.
